He called Jane and me to come to the meeting, and he
went through all the awards they had to give, and
finally he said, well, I have an apple for the
teacher. And he called my name, and then he called
the name of his high school teacher and sent him an
apple. And the high school teacher was at the table
I was in, And after he got back with his apple, he
said, well, do you dread being 72 years old? And I
said, well, no, not that. And I'm not sure I'm
telling it just exactly right. But he looked at me
and said, well, do you dread being 72 years old? And
I said, oh, no, I'm already past that. I'm so and so.
And I
just enjoyed the fact that I was older than his high
school teacher was. Did you organize the Campus
Young Republicans, or was it already going?
It wasn't going very strong. I do not have any
knowledge of it before I started working with
them. Describe your work with those, please.
About when was it and how did you get them going? I
have no idea exactly when it was, but somebody came
to me and asked me to be an advisor for them. I don't
really know who it was or when. But I agreed to be an
advisor because every organization had to have an
advisor. And if there had been anybody before me, I
don't know that. But I don't take credit for having
done it if I, you know, I just don't know. And I don't
really know what year it was. Among those bright
young Republicans, do you remember some names
with Not really. Was Fred McClure active in the
Young Republican? Not that I remember. And Rick
Perry?
The fact of the matter is, Rick Perry was a Democrat
until he ran for Texas Agriculture Commission.
Oh, that's right, that's right. See, he was a
member of the legislature as a Democrat. He made a
nice record for himself.
Did the Young Republicans meet often? No, they
didn't have any scheduled meeting. Most of the
young Republicans would get together when
somebody came to the campus that they thought they
wanted to hear.
Ford was vice president when he came to the campus
at A&M. I don't remember Reagan coming, but I think
he did. I don't know whether he did or not. I
remember when Vice President Ford came to speak at
commencement. Did you and the group greet him or
anything? I think so. I really do that. That was
just about all the contact we had.
When... When Reagan was running for the
nomination,
I went to the National Republican chairman and
told him, and his name was Long, L-O-N-G, told him
that Reagan could not carry Texas if Bush wasn't on
the ticket. And I also had contact with another
supporter of Reagan in Houston that I went to see.
And as I say, just like a lot of the other things, I
don't know whether I had anything to do with the
dog. But you didn't hurt. But when you drive from
Lubbock over to Midland and talk to a man and say,
look here, this is what you need to do, it ought to
have some effect. But I did not believe Reagan
could get the nomination without Bush. Let me add a
note in here for the typist. Typist, this is an
editor's note that I want you to add right after the
mention of Vice President Ford. He was scheduled
to speak in 1974, I believe it was. Watergate was at
its height, and we were hoping to have him speak at
A&M at about the time he was going to become
president because Nixon, we knew, wasn't going to
be there very long. I was the chairman of all the
commencement arrangements reported to me as dean
of faculties. We were in the letterman's lounge of
G. Raleigh White Coliseum, putting on our caps and
gowns, getting ready to go into commencement. And
all of us, because of the security arrangements to
ensure the safety of the vice president, we all had
special little lapel tags, and no one without one
of those tags was allowed into the rooms. Very soon
after we all got there, here came a man named M.T.
Harrington, former professor of chemistry and
dean and president and chancellor. And he and Vice
President Ford had been on many national
committees together, had worked together, were
truly old friends. He didn't have one of those
tags. And the university person checking the door
to see that no one was allowed into the letterman's
lounge that shouldn't be in there knew Dr.
Harrington very well. And so he didn't turn this
retired man away because he didn't have a lapel
tag. And so here came Dr. Harrington striding into
the room very rapidly, heading toward Gerald Ford
and with his one hand in his pocket and the other
hand reaching out around Vice President Ford's
shoulder. The CIA, or I guess it would be the Secret
Service men, did not recognize this man, of
course. They saw that he didn't have a lapel pin as
he should have. They grabbed him and shoved him up
against the wall and began to search him. while the
rest of us both frowned and chuckled at the same
time. Ford recognized him quickly and called him
by his nickname, and the two of them shook hands,
and quickly the Secret Service backed off. So much
for an introduction to Aggie welcomes. Back
now to chatting with you, what was the benefit, you
think, in the long run for these young people to be
part of the young Republicans while they were
undergraduates? Well, the only benefit that I
could see was the fact that we had been the minority
party so long and I had suffered so much
discrimination without giving up that I thought
they could be indoctrinated to where we'd have
some Republican leaders from that group of
people. And I think we have. Did you have some key
faculty and staff allies in those days? I don't
remember but one person that one year Mrs. Black
and I have no idea who she was, came and sort of
contested my being an advisor. And since I had been
so long an advisor, she was co-advisor with me for
one year. I don't know the woman. I don't know
anything about her at all. but she also was
recognized as a sponsor for a year. Now let's see,
you were on the faculty about 20 years? 22. 22. Who
were the key department leaders during those days
in your department, the key faculty and
department heads? Well,
since I was in the animal science building, the
head of the animal science department was one of
the key members of the agricultural faculty. I
knew people in ag education. You meant O.D.
Butler. O.D. Butler. Describe O.D. as a
department head, his leadership techniques. I
didn't have any contact with him except saying
hello to him as he went in and out of the building. I
was in the genetics department with Godby until he
retired. Who succeeded him? Well, they took the
genetics department and divided it into several
different sections. And I was put in the plant
science, and somebody else was put in animal
science, and somebody else was put over here. Who
headed plant science? Rossberg. Describe him as a
department leader. I thought Rossberg was one of
the poorest leaders that A&M had. This is David
R-O-S-S-B-E-R-G. That's right. Who succeeded
him? Uh... Johan. Howard Johan. J-O-H-A-N.
Right. What about him? He was a prince. What made
him so capable? Well, we had a young professor that
came into the department after I'd been there for a
couple of years. And his father was a geneticist at
Iowa State. And He really felt like that being a
young man, he just knew more than any old man around
there. And so when I had something that I wanted to
discuss with the department head, I'd have to go,
I'd talk to him. And by the time I got to Rossberg's
office, Jim Smith had been there, and instead of
listening to me, Rossberg would start telling me
what my problem was and how to solve it. And he had
Smith's version only, and that was why I had not
very much use for him. And I'm really baring my soul
for you young man. What about after Rossburg? I
mean, after Johan? Well, another man took the job
after Johan retired. But I retired the same year
Johan retired. Okay. All right. The dean of
agriculture, when you came...
I guess was Kunkel, I'm not sure. No, Patterson or
Watkins? Not the dean of agriculture. And then
Kunkel. Well, I don't know that. Okay. In 57, I
don't think that I had either of these other two
people, but I'm not going to. All right. When the
board voted to approve coeducation and make the
core optional, what did you and your colleagues
think? Most of us were glad. We thought it should
have been done earlier. What result did you think
it would bring to A&M? I just thought it would bring
growth to the college and some sort of mixing of the
sexes that had prevented A&M from growing so many
years. One of the things that I can add to it, that I
had a daughter that graduated And she couldn't go
to A&M and she got her degree from TWU. And I had
another daughter that couldn't go to A&M who had to
go to Abilene Christian College. And after they
opened A&M to girls, she was taking courses in the
summertime at A&M and going to to Abilene in the
long term. And so she went back to Abilene because
she was a leader in Abilene. And she said, Daddy,
they elected me president of the Eta Beta Club. And
I want to go back since I was elected. I want to go
back. So she went to Abilene two years and went to
A&M one year and got her degree from A&M. And I doubt
if there was a A female got a degree from A&M before
Ruth did, except maybe a veterinarian student who
was female and admitted before it was open to all
females. Did she ever share any stories about how
she was treated as a pioneer co-ed at A&M? Not
particularly. So you didn't hear of any problems?
She didn't have any problems.
I took a course with her one time. I generally took a
course every two or three years. I decided that it
made you humble if you got in a class. I took a
Spanish class one time that I didn't do well in, and
I was ashamed of myself. I took a psychology class
at the same time Ruth took it. And Ruth would answer
the roll, The teacher would call my name first, Mr.
McNeil, and then he'd say, Mrs. McNeil, and Ruth
would snort and say, Miss McNeil. And... after the
course was over with, he said, I didn't know if she
wasn't your wife until after she took me quiz and
said she beat you a few points and she was so
jubilant about it that I realized that it wasn't a
wife having fun with her husband. I don't know what
kind of an old goat he thought I was, but anyway, I
took a psychology course one time. Do you remember
some of the first coeds you had in class?
Well,
one of them was Dr. Deeker's wife, Dr. Deeker's,
Paul Deeker's mother. D-I-E-K-E-R-T. Right. And
she was a good student. She made an A, and her son
made a B, but he was having to, do all of the things
that he was interested in. And he had a lab class and
he missed a class or two in genetics with outside
activity.
Did some faculty members have to change some of
their stories and examples when ladies were in the
class? That's right. Do you remember in your
classes, do you remember any pranks that the male
students tried to play on the coeds? I don't
remember anything. I never saw anything. What
about racial integration? Do you remember any
difficulties any black student ever
encountered? No, I don't. But there weren't many
blacks coming. When the people that I knew in
Pakistan came to America on grants,
when they came to America at their orientation in
Washington, They'd say, well, what do you want to
do? And at least seven or eight people that I knew
over there said, well, we want to go to College
Station. We've got a friend in College Station.
And when they came here and walked on the campus of
A&M, one of the first things they noticed was that
there was no blacks. And they said to me, where are
the blacks going to school? And I said, well, they
go to school at Prairie View. It's part of A&M. And
they said, we want to see Prairie View. And I don't
know how many trips I made to Prairie View, taking
people from Pakistan down to Prairie View. And I
would go to the president of Prairie View and tell
him that we were on the campus. And Prairie View had
a rule that no
black people and white people could eat in the
dining hall. And he had asked me to go with the
Pakistanis to have our lunch. And one time I said,
Doctor,
can't get the name now, Evans. said, Dr. Evans,
I'll go into town. These people want to eat with
you. And he said, I can't do that. He said, if I went
in there with these people that are considered
same as white people, he said, I'd be in trouble.
And I don't know how many people I took to Prairie
View that I ate in his place. I was the host in his
place. Did the Pakistanis ever mention to you any
difficulty they had at A&M? Not really. I took Kazi
to the grocery store every time he went to the
store.
I went to the grocery store one morning, and one of
my students was the meat cutter. And he finished my
order, and a woman came up because he was with me.
And so I finished mine. And this woman stepped up,
and he said, is there anything else, Dr. McNeil?
And I said, no, but this man is my friend, and he's
going to get his order finished before you can. I
don't have any idea who the woman was, but it was a
white woman, I guarantee you. And there was, that
answers your question if I understand it.
Mr. Rutter made these, he led these key changes at
A&M. How did you and your faculty associates come
to feel about him and his leadership?
Well, he was much more respected when he left than
he was when he came. What about Jack Williams, who
followed him? Jack Williams was a completely
different person, and he was good for A&M. He's my
favorite. He was good for A&M. I finally... said,
look here, here I am teaching all of these students
and I'm going to find out why I haven't gotten a
raise. And I went to the department head and he
said, oh, you know, Jim Smith had been there. And
then I went to Kunkel
and he said, well, you haven't done any research
work. I said, you know, research work is
important. And I said, well, I've been teaching
students and so on and so on. And he said, well, I
said, if I don't get help from you, I'm going to
Williams. And Williams was really annoyed with me
for not stopping because Kunkel told me to stop.
But I told him what I thought, and I didn't lose
respect for him at all. But I did feel like that he
had problems. That's all there is to it. And then
Dr. Williams has the heart attack, and he is
replaced then. He becomes chancellor, and Jarvis
Miller became president. Did you all have any
perception of Jarvis as president? Not any, as far
as I'm concerned. All right, we're getting near
the end then. As you look back over these years...
What were the positive, important decisions that
A&M leadership made during your years? Well, the
abolishing core requirement was number one as far
as I was concerned. And the admission of women may
have been greater than abolishing the
requirement for core. I don't know that. but those
two things. And to one extent or another, the only
problem that I was able to find was the fact that the
salaries were not really equal. If you come to the
office and waved a telegram in somebody's face,
you got a raise, and if you didn't come to the office
with a telegram in your hand, they didn't give you a
raise. Are there any omission? Well, first of all,
mistakes. Can you think of any key decisions that
were now we can say were mistakes?
I think it was a mistake to fire Gene Stallings as
football coach. Okay, okay. I really do. I was in
Dallas when A&M beat Alabama and Bryant carried
Gene off the field. Other mistakes that you can...
Any omissions where we had a chance and we just
passed it by?
I'm asking things that I really don't have any way
of judgment. And I don't have any to suggest. All
right,
who were some people highly deserving of credit
that we may have kind of overlooked? Like you
mentioned Howard Gravitt. Wasn't Howard Gravitt
a very capable pre-med advisor? No question. I did
not question that at all. No, I know you didn't. But
in the meantime, when I first started teaching, he
sent me cards to evaluate the pre-med students.
And it got to be that I had a class of 250 and then
another 250 in spring term. And there was no way for
me to evaluate. Fifteen men out of 250, and I just
sent them back to him and said, I can't do it
anymore. I'm not fair. Couldn't make it. What
about Dean Potts? I thought Dean Potts did a great
job. I never had any problem as far as I was
concerned. with Posh. I thought Posh was a fair,
level-headed, conscientious man. Wayne Stark? I
didn't have that much contact with Wayne Stark.
Gordon Gay? I thought Gordon Gay did a fantastic
job. And the thing that bothers me is the fact that
the man who took his place was a CBI man. And he was
there for seventeen years that I didn't know that
he had been in CBI. Now what was his name?
Replace Gordon Gay? Yeah, Replace Gordon Gay.
He was called a fighting preacher whenever he was
in CBI.
And I didn't know him well enough to...
All right, if you now could be an advisor to Texas
A&M's leadership, what advice would you give
them?
Well, the only thing that I would advise... is that
they should give more emphasis to the teaching of
young men than to the praise and glory they give to
their research people. And you said men. You meant
men and women. Well, yes, I did. So give more credit
for teaching than they now give instead of giving
so much to research. That's right. Any other
advice you would give them?
Well, not really.
Let's see. What have we left out? I'm about done. To
the end of the ideas I thought. Well, you've asked
an awful lot of things that are in my memoir. All
right. Let's see. If you ever have any memorabilia
about your A&M experiences that you are going to
dispose of, I beg that you please contact the A&M
archives because they will preserve them and
would be They will then be a treasure house for
everybody to use. Please don't throw them away.
Let's make believe that somebody walks up to you
and gives you a million-dollar check, but the one
requirement of that check is that you must pass it
on to Texas A&M. If you could make a substantial
gift to Texas A&M, what would you want them to do
with that gift? What purpose would you most want
them to accomplish? Since I was in academics, I
want to strengthen the academics rather than the
research. All right. Where? How? Well, give
better teachers to the freshmen that come into A&M
instead of giving them graduate students to teach
classes and do whatever they do. In any particular
discipline? Not any. I have no criticism of any
department at A&M. Among your many, many memories
of A&M, which ones do you cherish most? What were
the your happiest A&M moments, proudest? I guess
I'd have to say that it was when I got, was
recognized as an outstanding professor in 1965.
And the next one was when I was named as one of the
outstanding professors in the School of Arts of
Let me see how that word, the one that Dean,
hmm, that word left me too. Sciences and
agriculture and sciences or biology and sciences
or something like that. They started that program
in 74. And four people were recognized. And the
head of the animal science department, Butler,
was one of them. And I do not know all of the others.
John Hutchinson was recognized. John and I slept
in the same room the first year I went to A&M. He was
working on a poultry farm when I was working on the
poultry farm And I don't know the other two, but I'm
I think they were politicians to tell you the truth
and then the next four was McNeil and the publisher
of the Southern agriculture. I don't remember
exactly the name of the magazine, but his name was
Scruggs. And I saw Scruggs and McGregor not too
long ago, and I said, well,